I am in a glider somewhere above Oxfordshire with Bruce, my pilot and instructor
behind me. Thank you very much, Bruce.
And I have a bottle of water with me.
We now fly horizontally and as you would expect the water in the bottle is approximately horizontal.
But take a good look at what happens when we start running.
Bruce, a spin - there we go. A left turn.
O wow, what a view! Now take a good look at this.
Look at the horizon. According to the camera, it is no longer horizontal.
But look at the bottle: the water here is flat. If you can not see the horizon,
then you do not feel that you are in a corner.
And watch how fast we go!
That's very strange, right? But if you've ever been in a jetliner, one
commercial plane, you know that it can make such a turn without it
to throw your food and drinks.
Thank you, Bruce, back in a horizontal position.
Now, what would happen if we could not see the horizon?
Because there is a lot of strange delusion going on here.
If you do not see the horizon anymore, hit after about 15 to 20 seconds ...
your equilibrium organs used to it. The only difference that you notice is
a little g-force, but that is hardly noticeable.
If your only reference is your own sense of being: the forces count together ...
so downstairs is always where your feet are. Even while turning.
A bottle of water will not help you either.
Now again while turning to the right, still right here.
If we flew higher now, just below those pretty scary clouds above us ...
and we could not see;
then we would not know if we were running. And that is terrifying.
Because when you turn, you lose a little height. And if you drop you say
altimeter that you go down; and you think you're flying horizontally?
To keep your height then you will try to withdraw. But in a bend
makes the problem worse. It makes the turn narrower and narrower and ultimately ....
you come in what, for obvious reasons, is called a graveyard spiral. (Deadly spiral)
That is why we do not fly in clouds or at night.
BRUCE: I'm going to accelerate to 100 knots, draw horizontally and then slowly move on ...
TOM: Oh dear. Yes Yes Yes.
BRUCE: There it goes.
TOM: O wow. O wow. Stay calm.
Stay calm. Stay calm. Stay calm.
[GEROEP]
BRUCE: Look up.
TOM: O mine. O wow. [INCOMPATIBLE]
BRUCE: Yee-ha!
TOM: Bruce. Thank you very much.
BRUCE: That was great.
TOM: Bruce is a member of the Edinburgh University Gliding Club and I also need the Loughborough
Thanking University Gliding Club and Alistair who brought me here.
Now back safely to the ground. Thanks again very much.
That was amazing.
Subtitles by Anonymous Hoverfly Enthusiastic.